# River Cards

When playing a river card, you must ford the river.  Place your marker on the rear part of the card (before crossing the river) and roll the dice to attempt to ford the river.  Follow the directions on the card.  You make your first attempt on the turn in which you play the card.  If you succeed, then move your marker across the river to the front of the card.  If you do not succeed, then you are stuck in the river and remain on the rear of the card until your next turn when you must attempt to ford the river again as your action on that turn.  You are stuck in the river until you ford it; you cannot take any other action until you do.  You cannot even travel back along your trail or use the "Mend Any Calamity" action.

Calamities that allow you to attempt to instantly mend them (or avoid them) you can still do, you just cannot use your action on your turn to mend a calamity.  For example, if a "Broken Tongue" calamity is played on you, you still roll the dice and potentially avoid the calamity; and if the "Measles" calamity is played on you, you can still discard a medicine card and avoid the calamity.  But, if you don't avoid the calamity then you receive it and must ford the river before you can do anything about it (or you lose a turn before you can return to attempting to ford the river in the case of Measles).  This can be very dangerous; be careful with your river crossings -- especially when you are likely to have calamities played on you.

# Calamity Cards

When playing a calamity card, you select another player to receive the calamity.  Pick the player before the calamity card is revealed.  See the [calamity details](calamities.md) section for details on each specific calamity card.

When calamities that say you have "X rounds of play" to resolve the calamity before some consequence happens, you have X turns times the number of virtual people in your wagon.  You start the game with 4, and you lose one whenever a calamity says that you have died.  Some calamities kill instantly, some kill when left un-treated for too long.  You can also loose people when fording rivers.  So, when you are told, "two rounds of play without a food card and you have died of starvation" and you have a full 4 virtual people in your wagon then you have 8 turns to mend that calamity or else your people count goes down to 3.  If you only have one virtual person left in your wagon, you only have 2 turns and if you don't mend it, you are out of the game because all your people have died.  So, the advantage of having more people in your wagon is that it gives you more time to deal with calamities.

When calamities say that you lose a turn (such as "Broken Arm" or "Measles") you lose only the number of turns specified, it is not multiplied by the number of people in your wagon.  But, those lost turns still count against the count-down of any other active calamities on you.

When calamities say that you die if the other, matching calamity card comes up (such as Cholera) then if the second card gets played on another player while you still have not mended yours then you each loose a virtual wagon member.  If the other, matching card gets played on you, then you lose two virtual wagon members.

The "hunting" calamity has no ill effect and allows you to trade a bullets supply card for a food supply card if you have a bullets supply card and want to do that.  If so, look through the supply discard pile, or failing that the deck, for a food card and then re-shuffle the supply deck if you looked through it.  The "thief" calamity allows the person that played the calamity on you to steal a supply card from you.  You hold up your supply cards and they randomly draw one, unless you have the bullets supply card.  If you have bullets you can instead discard the bullets and the thief does not draw a card from you.

# Forts / Towns

Forts and Towns both work exactly the same in this game, despite the fact that they say different things on them.  In all manners, treat them the same.  When you play a fort / town, you place it perpendicular to the trail.  It can be played on any position of trail card and any sort of trail card can be played out of it.  You place it perpendicular because it becomes a part of everyone's trail.  For discovering the town, you receive two free supply cards.  Everyone else that arrives in the town gets one free supply card.  Besides the special "Mend Any Calamity" action that can only be taken when in a town, the free supply card(s) are the other advantage of the town.

If other players are ahead of your trail when you play the town, then you simply slide their trail cards apart at the point of the town so that it becomes a part of their trail.  They are now one step closer to Oregon.  They can make use of the calamity mending features of the town if they want to come back to it, but they do not get a free supply card.  So, it is only the people that are behind you that also get a free supply card in a town that you play.

Once other players have forged a trail up to your town they have an option, they can step into the town as the action of their turn (and receive a free supply card) or they can choose to skip the town and go from their trail before the town to the next trail card they forge right after the town without spending a turn to stop in the town.  But, in this case, they are forfeiting their free supply card.  Either way, the trail card after the town does not have to match up with the trail card before the town.

When a town (or fort) is played, count up how many players are behind the town, including yourself, and add one to it.  This is the number of supply cards the town will give out for free (if nobody skips the town).  Draw this number of supplies off the supply deck and place them by the town.  You look at the supply cards and select the two that you want to take.  As each other player reaches the town, they look at the supply cards left by the town and pick the one they want.  So, the more people behind the town, the greater a selection of supplies you will be able to choose from, but also the more players will get a free supply.  Also, arriving at the town sooner than other players has an advantage in that you have a better selection of the remaining supplies in the town.  Once the last player has reached or passed the town, any left over supplies from players skipping the town are discarded.

